# Lab 5: Physical Design

We've spent the last labs and lectures diving into all of the awesome infrastructure available for designing SoCs,
taking you from Chisel, a higher-level HDL embedded in Scala, all the way through composable SoC components abstracted behind config fragments.

One large consideration remains, however:
how do we make this all real?

The course, so far, has been concerned with the generation & writing of RTL, which is a **behavioral description** of what we want our circuit to do.
There are no polygons, no timing paths, just _intent_. 

Physical design, which will be explored in this lab, is the process of taking that intent (RTL) and turning it into an equivalent (but manufacturable) physical layout!

This lab will contain some theory, they mainly act as supplemental to the lecture material and can be also used as reference. If you know what is going on for a particular topic from lecture coverage, feel free to skip those theory sections, otherwise **please read the theory sections; otherwise you may find yourself to be very lost in later sections**. (Also these theory sections contain information that can frequently come up in a PD interview... So information might be good to know anyways :p)

# EECS151LA Review
EECS151LA's lab 4 has a very well-written overview on [PaR](https://github.com/EECS150/asic-labs-sp24/tree/main/lab4).
We highly encourage you read the lab's prose (and not just skip to the questions like you might have if/when you took the course). 
For the sake of ensuring that everyone is on the same page, some of the following content will be repeated from EECS151-LA lab 4 (or other labs), and some might look similar but be a little bit different from what you saw in EECS151.

# [FYI] Theory: CAD Tooling
VLSI/PD uses lots of tools and tools have unintuitive names. Here is a table. Very similar to what you probably saw in EECS151, but updated to be more complete.
[Aside: the following technically includes simulation tools, which technically is not part of PD, but this is good information to have.]

The big 3 EDA (Electronic Design Automation) companies are Cadence, Synopsys, and Siemens. Together, they pretty much hold 100% of the market share for the VLSI EDA space.

|  | Synopsys | Cadence | Siemens | Open-Source
|---|---|---|---|---|
| RTL Simulation | VCS* | Xcelium | Questa (formerly Mentor ModelSim) | Icarus Verilog, Verilator
| RTL-Power | PrimePower RTL, SpyGlass | Joules | PowerPro-RTL | - |
| Synthesis | FusionCompiler (Design Compiler) | Genus | Oasys-RTL | Yosys Open Synthesis Suite
| Place & Route | FusionCompiler (IC Compiler II) | Innovus | Aprisa | OpenROAD | 
| Physical Layout (for Full Custom Analog/Digital), Analog/Mixed-Signal IC | Custom Compiler | Virtuoso | L-Edit^ | - |
| Gate Level Power | PrimePower | Voltus | PowerPro | - |
| DRC/LVS/Physical Verification | IC Validator | Pegasus | Calibre | Magic [Developed at Berkeley!], KLayout
| Parasitic Extraction (PEX) & Signoff | [Synopsys Signoff](https://www.synopsys.com/implementation-and-signoff/signoff.html#products) | Certus Closure Solution | Calibre | OpenRCX, KLayout

\* Note about VCS: VCS is the simulator, the waveform viewer you may have used in EECS151 is called DVE (≠VCS). DVE is old, industry primarily now uses [Verdi](https://www.synopsys.com/verification/debug/verdi.html) for waveform viewing (photo [here](./Lab_5_assets_rewrite/verdi.png)) if they are in the Synopsys ecosystem for RTL simulation. 

^ Note about L-Edit: you might also see names such as Tanner L-Edit or Mentor L-Edit - They are the same thing.

# Theory: Inputs/Outputs of each VLSI Step
We've heard about the different tools for each step... What do these tools take in terms of input & what do they output? This section should help you understand flow of how your design goes from RTL to a GDS.

A thing to keep in mind: These tools are controlled by a scripting language called TCL (pronounced "tickle"). Each tool has its own set of commands that can be called within a TCL file. These commands are the primary way digital designers control these VLSI tools. These commands look like terminal commands where you have a command like `cp`, followed by some flags and arguments. TCL files have the file extension `.tcl`. We will talk about how to write TCL to control these tools in a later section; this is just a heads up so you don't get confused when you see these commands in the following few sections.

## Synthesis
Broadly, synthesis follows the following flow:

### 1. Write/Generate SDCs
SDCs or Synopsys Design Constraint files should either be manually written or generated by some tool.

SDC files contain design timing information (special cases, restrictions, etc), creation of clocks (and clock dividers, clock inverters, etc), I/O pin constraints such as defining external load capacitance connected to a top level port, among other things. (For more detail, read [this](https://signoffsemiconductors.com/introduction-to-sdc/)).

At Berkeley, we have a tool called [Hammer](https://hammer-vlsi.readthedocs.io/) that generates the SDC commands for us, and automatically writes them to a SDC file according a some specifications we defined in a [YAML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML#Example) configuration file. We will discuss Hammer in a later section, but if you are curious, the source code that generates these SDC commands is [here](https://github.com/ucb-eecs151tapeout/ofot-hammer/blob/0f5388ed185e52254bfabe7c127b73aedfd26d90/hammer/vlsi/hammer_vlsi_impl.py#L2183-L2284).

You can find the SDCs your synthesis process used at `${CY}/vlsi/build/chipyard.harness.TestHarness.<someConfig>-ChipTop/syn-rundir/clock_constraints_fragment.sdc` and `${CY}/vlsi/build/chipyard.harness.TestHarness.<someConfig>-ChipTop/syn-rundir/pin_constraints_fragment.sdc`

### 2. Write/Generate MMMC (Multi-mode, Multi-corner) Views
The process of doing this at a high level is:
1. Read SDC Files
2. Read in `.lib` files
3. Create MMMC corners

.lib files: Liberty Timing Files are timing libraries generated by the foundry that contains timing, area and power information for standard cells.

For the SkyWater 130nm Process, Liberty Timing Files can be found at `/home/ff/ee198/ee198-20/sky130_col/sky130_scl_9T_0.1.2/sky130_scl_9T/lib`

MMMC Corners: Multi-mode, Multi-corner views attempt to cover all real world environments where your chip may be used in, then provide this information to the tool, so it can accurately provide timing information.
Modes are defined by different functional modes that your chip will operate in (high-performance, low-power, etc.) -- This is reflected by different supply voltages and timing constraints.
Corners represent a set of data that attempts to capture variations in the manufacturing process (specifically higher and lower carrier mobilities in NMOS & PMOS -- Read more [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_corners#FEOL_corners)) and how they will impact performance of the chip, along with how variations in voltage and temperature of the surrounding environment that your chip will operate in will change timing and other parameters.

You can find the script that your synthesis run used to generate MMMC corners at `${CY}/vlsi/build/chipyard.harness.TestHarness.<someConfig>-ChipTop/syn-rundir/mmmc.tcl`

### 3. Read in LEF files
LEF or Library Exchange Format files includes rules and specifications about the standard cells and metal interconnects. There are 2 types of LEF files:

Don't worry too much if you don't know what the following terms mean; We will come back to this section when you get to the [Exploring the SkyWater 130nm PDK section].

**Technology LEFs -- "Tech LEFs" -- ".tlefs"**
* These contain information regarding the process as a whole (information about the stackup) -- diffusion layer, poly-silicon layer, metal interconnect information, Via information, possible placement sites ("classes") and their dimensions.
    * "information" = minimum spacing between metal lines, via width, spacing requirements, sheet resistance information for different metal layers and vias.

The technology LEF for the SkyWater 130nm Process can be found at `/home/ff/ee198/ee198-20/sky130_col/sky130_scl_9T_0.1.2/sky130_scl_9T_tech/lef/sky130_scl_9T.tlef`. Take a look!


**Standard Cell LEFs -- ".lef"**
* These contain information regarding each standard cell (or broadly, each macro/logic block that can be placed)
    * "information" = Cell name, a placement site that the specific standard cell can be placed at, XY-coordinates defining the origin of the standard cell, size of the cell, pin information (the cell's I/O).

The LEFs for the SkyWater 130nm Process can be found at:
* `/home/ff/ee198/ee198-20/sky130_col/sky130_scl_9T_0.1.2/sky130_scl_9T/lef/sky130_scl_9T.lef`
* `/home/ff/ee198/ee198-20/sky130_col/sky130_scl_9T_0.1.2/sky130_scl_9T_tech/lef/sky130_scl_9T_phyCells.lef`

We will explain why there are to .lef files in the [Exploring the SkyWater 130nm PDK section].

### 4. Read in RTL
This step is pretty simple: the synthesis tool reads in all of the RTL that makes up your design! One of these files should be your top-level Verilog file.

### 5. Sanity Checks
The tool then runs a sanity check on the design and timing specifications. 
This involves making sure that there is no combinational loops, multidriven nets, etc and that there are no missing clock definitions, missing information for the I/O ports, multi-clock driven registers, etc.

### 6. Generic Mapping
In EECS151 Lab 3's words:
> This step is the generic synthesis step. In this step, [the synthesis tool] converts our RTL read in the previous step into an intermediate format, made up of technology-independent generic gates. These gates are purely for gate-level functional representation of the RTL we have coded, and are going to be used as an input to the next step. This step also performs logical optimizations on our design to eliminate any redundant/unused operations.

For Cadence Genus, this step is identifiable by the command `syn_generic` being run.

### 7. Technology Mapping
> This step is the mapping step. [The synthesis tool] takes its own generic gate-level output and converts it to [technology]-specific gates. This step further optimizes the design given the gates in our technology. That being said, this step can also increase the number of gates from the previous step as not all gates in the generic gate-level Verilog may be available for our use and they may need to be constructed using several, simpler gates.

For Cadence Genus, this step is identifiable by the command `syn_map` being run.

### 8. Optimization
Optional step, where the TCL command `syn_opt` is called for the tool to perform some further optimizations. 

### 9. Add Tieoffs
> In some designs, the pins in certain cells are hardwired to 0 or 1, which requires a tie-off cell. This step adds these cells.

Here is an example of the TCL script telling Cadence Genus which gates/standard cells are to be used for tieoff, and then calling Genus to add the tieoffs:

```
set HI_TIEOFF [get_db base_cell:TIEHI .lib_cells -if { .library.library_set.name == $ACTIVE_SET }]

set LO_TIEOFF [get_db base_cell:TIELO .lib_cells -if { .library.library_set.name == $ACTIVE_SET }]

add_tieoffs -high $HI_TIEOFF -low $LO_TIEOFF -max_fanout 1 -verbose
```

### 10. Generate Reports
> Generates post-synthesis reports on area, utilization, timing, runtime, etc

Note: Most of these reports will not be particularly accurate since they don't take into account routing congestion, wire delay, clock tree delays and clock skew, which the Place & Route flow takes into account. So post-synthesis reports should be used for a ball park reference only.

### 11. Write outputs
Writes the results of the synthesis flow. This includes gate-level Verilog, a SDC file for the post-synthesis design, a .sdf (Standard Delay Format) file containing timing information (path delays, timing constraints for checks)

Here is the TCL (note, paths are different here) for writing the 3 different output files:

```
write_hdl > ${CY}/vlsi/build/chipyard.harness.TestHarness.<your config>-ChipTop/syn-rundir/ChipTop.mapped.v

write_sdc -view ss_100C_1v60.setup_view > ${CY}/vlsi/build/chipyard.harness.TestHarness.<your config>-ChipTop/syn-rundir/ChipTop.mapped.sdc

write_sdf > ${CY}/vlsi/build/chipyard.harness.TestHarness.<your config>-ChipTop/syn-rundir/ChipTop.mapped.sdf
```

You can view the 3 written files at the file paths above as specified in the TCL script.